Skyscrapers, Sellouts and the Skyline of San Francisco 
	I was born in San Francisco, but grew up in the East Bay. Growing up, it seemed like everyone in the Bay was moving East -- inland, away from San Francisco. This migratory trend of long standing locals moving away from San Francisco at first shaped the narrative of the city for me, despite San Francisco’s rising population. But the exploitation of San Francisco by dominant industry and the political control against non-white residents have always been visible in the San Francisco skyline and roadways. Using the methods Harvey used to explore Baltimore, I came to understand the roadways shaped lines of political power while the skyscrapers denoted lines of economic power. 
	San Francisco underwent three general, massive periods of transformation: in the 1840s, in the early 1900s, and in the mid to late 1900s. The 1840s marked the first development of San Francisco because of the gold rush, bringing both poverty and wealth to the region.  Mining, agriculture, fishing and timber were the primary industries. The next major period of development -- and complete rebuilding -- was the 1906 earthquake, which destroyed the majority of the city. By the early 1900s, the San Francisco economy had shifted towards warehouses, industrialization, and ports with the construction of large warehouses, factories and massive shipping buildings such as the Ferry Building or the Navy Shipyard indicating this change. In the mid-1900s (1950-1980), San Francisco experienced what The Chronicle’s defining voice in this time, editor Herb Caen, called a “vertical earthquake”. This boom in development of high rises left its defining legacy in its permanent alteration of the San Francisco skyline and in lingering severe zoning, height and development regulations that continues to drive houses prices up and locals out today. This “Manhattanization” of the skyline marked the dominance of the tech, service, and financial sectors and the emergence of an international foreign trade and investment. 
	Market Street runs down the middle of the “central business district” (CBD) or economic center of San Francisco. Located near the water on the northeastern side of the City, it’s been the center of San Francisco for most of San Francisco’s history. More than any one building, the long Market Street roadway has signified the urban core of San Francisco. The 1920s saw the first skyscraper built on Market Street and the 1960s and 1970s saw the second of these skyscraper booms, including the construction of two large theaters, the Golden Gate Theater and the Orpheum. Rebuilt, redesigned, and commodified as a political symbol and promise after the 1906 earthquake, Market Street physically connected the newly rebuilt City Hall, the corporate skyscrapers of the Financial District and the Ferry Building down by the water. The street itself was a point of connection between politics, economics and burgeoning industries of tourism. Two other roadway expansions in the 1950s and 60s would go on to shape the politics of the city: the Embarcadero Freeway, built in 1958, and the Fillmore Expressway, built in 1960. Both cutting through districts the Home Owners Loan Corporation deemed “poor quality” as intended urban revitalization projects (Figure 1). Today, much of San Francisco’s homeless population lives alongside the Embarcadero Freeway. 
	The Fillmore Expressway cut through the Fillmore district, just off of Market Street near the geographic center of San Francisco. The Fillmore, a diverse district in the early to mid 1900s, was briefly the economic center of San Francisco. After the 1906 earthquake destroyed Market Street, the commercial and social heart of the city moved to Lotta’s fountain, located at Geary Boulevard and Kearny Street, in the Fillmore district. At the start of the 1940s and 50s, the Fillmore district was thought of as the “Harlem of the West”. Two major events changed this. First, inspired by the Home Owners Loan Corproation’s urban renewal projects, the San Francisco Housing Agency began a political mission to remove “blight” and clear “slums''. This included not just the Fillmore but the predominantly black neighborhoods of Hunter’s Point and the Western Addition (Figure 1). Geary Boulevard, once the post-quake economic center of San Francisco, was bulldozed to build the Fillmore Expressway, devastatingly severing the district in half, cutting people off from jobs, the community and even their homes (Figure 2). The second was the labor shift into service and financial industries, away from the Navy shipyard erected during World War II that had increased the African American population from 5,000 to 40,000. The industrial shift, coupled with the Fillmore Expressway, displaced at least 30,000 people, demolished 5,000 homes and closed over 1,000 businesses across the Fillmore, Western Addition and Hunter’s Point. This was one of the biggest examples of the devastating architectural effect the 50s and 60s construction of roadways had on San Francisco’s geographic exclusion of African Americans. 
	The destruction of the Fillmore did start to spark a political backlash to these urban development projects and in 1978, the city switched to district wide instead of city wide elections for the Board of Supervisors which governed the city. This gave a voice to communities who rarely were heard -- the first Asian American woman, the first openly gay man and the first African American woman were all elected in 1977 to serve the Board of Supervisors. With that, came the political resistance to skyscrapers that dominated San Francisco’s development policy until very recently. Height caps, complex approval processes for development, and explicitly fixed residential zoning that resulted from the legacy of the Fillmore Expressway would come to characterize the housing problems within the city until the early 2000s. 
As much as San Francisco’s political landscape was shaped through the roads, San Francisco's economic narrative was spoken through its skyscrapers. San Francisco’s first skyscraper was built right in the middle of Market Street in 1989 by a development firm from Chicago. The Chronicle stood at a grand ten stories and at the time of development, was the tallest building on the West Coast. It did not hold this record for long: the second major skyscraper was built directly across the street to house the Chronicle’s rival and stood at eighteen stories. Today, The Chronicle, San Francisco’s first skyrise, has been transformed into a series of luxury residences by the Ritz-Carlton. Meanwhile, buildings owned by technology giants such as Twitter or Autodeck and major transnational companies like by the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange, the Federal Reserve Bank, the Transamerica Corporation, Levi Strauss, or Chevron anchor the Market Street skyline, blotting out the landscape of previous industries.
One of the most recent and controversial editions to the city skyline is the Salesforce Tower, named for its anchor tenant the company: Salesforce. Built in 2018 and breaking a San Francisco height record set more than five decades ago by the Transamerica Pyramid in 1972, it is visible from everywhere in the city. The Transamerica Pyramid was once one of San Francisco’s tallest, grandest and most iconic buildings built by the Transamerica Corporation. Now, even as the Salesforce Tower draws loud condemnation, more corporate skyscrapers are being built. The Millenium Tower, the latest proposed skyscraper, is even being built on foundation so weak it is actually sinking. San Francisco’s tech industry grew 39% between 2016 and 2017 (compared to an average of 7% in most cities) with nearly a quarter of the citizen’s of San Francisco employed in tech in 2017. Walking around the city, evidence of the tech industries dominance is impossible to ignore: the tech boom has produced more than fifteen new skyscrapers in a city heavily resistant to them. Even while the industry changes, it is still corporate interests that continue to govern and shape the skyline of San Francisco.   
	The loss of San Francisco’s working class neighborhoods and industry is most evident through the Ferry Building. Located in Fisherman’s Wharf, an Italian American refuge of the early 1900s, the Ferry Building was a massive ferry terminal and clock tower, was first built in 1898. It dominated the landscape of the early 1900s San Francisco waterfront skyline (Figure 3). At the time, it was the largest development project in the city, a remnant of the time that San Francisco was the premier fishing city in the United States and bustling center of business. Fishermen started selling crab on the Wharf and by 1960, restaurants were crammed into every free space of Fisherman’s Wharf. The Ferry Building itself was broken down and converted into office space as part of the transformation from blue collar labor to a service industry. A wax museum was opened in 1963, Ripley’s Believe it Or Not was opened in 1967 and in 1978, Pier 39 -- a semi outdoor mall and tourist trap -- was constructed. By the mid-1980s, the conditions of commercial fishing had deteriorated so severely it took nearly 7 million dollar investment to revitalize commercial fishing operations on Fisherman’s Wharf. The Ferry Building, once a necessity of the thriving blue collar commercial fishing district, was now used to take tourists on beautiful boat rides around San Francisco’s most overpriced and profitable tourist stop (Figure 4). 
	The roadways built in San Francisco at the height of “redevelopment” permanently altered the political landscape by destroying marginalized communities and leaving behind a complex legacy of regulations. The skyline, on the other hand, has and still continues to reflect the lines of economic power within the city. 


Figures
Figure 1. HOLC Map of San Francisco. Green represents the highest grade or best quality districts and red represents the lowest grade or worst quality districts. Map from Robert K. Nelson and the University of Richmond’s Mapping Inequality digitizations of HOLC maps. 
          Figure 2. The demolition of Geary Boulevard (a two lane road in the heart of the Fillmore) to make way for an expressway, June 30th 1960. Courtesy of the San Francisco History Center via San Francisco’s digital archive. 
Figure 3. The Ferry Building, 1917. Photo taken by Mike McGarvey, courtesy of the San Francisco Digital Archives accessed through foundsf.org. The Ferry Building is a place of building operations, a defining feature of the skyline by Fisherman’s Wharf. 

Figure 4. The Ferry Building, 2007. Photo taken by Chris Carlsson, courtesy of the San Francisco Digital Archives accessed through foundsf.org. The Ferry Building, preserved for the tourism industry, is dwarfed by the corporate skyscrapers, now the industrial center of the city’s economy. 




Works Cited
 Chen, Y. (2002). Chinese San Francisco, 1850-1943: A Trans-Pacific Community. Stanford University Press.
Cutler, K. (2014). How Burrowing Owls Lead to Anarchism (or SF's Housing Crisis Explained). Techcrunch.com. Retrieved 8 October 2020, from https://techcrunch.com/2014/04/14/sf-housing/.
Dillon, L. (2014). Race, waste, and space: Brownfield redevelopment and environmental justice at the Hunters Point Shipyard. Antipode, 46(5), 1205-1221.
Harvey, D. (1991) A view from Federal Hill. In E. Fee; L. Shopes & L. Zeidman (Eds), The Baltimore Book. New Views of Local History (1st ed., pp. 227-249). Temple University Press.
Graff, A. (2019). The Manhattanization of SF: How the city's skyline has changed in the last two decades. SFGate. Retrieved 8 October 2020, from https://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/san-francisco-tallest-buildings-skyscrapers-height-13532960.php.
Godfrey, B. J. (1997). Urban development and redevelopment in San Francisco. Geographical Review, 87(3), 309-333.
Jackson, C., & Jones, N. (2012). Remember the Fillmore: The lingering history of urban renewal in Black San Francisco.
Jackson, K. (1985). "Federal Subsidy and the Suburban Dream: How Washington Changed the American Housing Market”.
Jonas, A. E., McCann, E., & Thomas, M. (2015). Urban geography: a critical introduction. John Wiley & Sons.
McGovern, S. J. (2014). The politics of downtown development: Dynamic political cultures in San Francisco and Washington, DC. University Press of Kentucky.
Pawlowska, K. (2017). Rise and Shine: A History of San Francisco's City Skyline - SPACES Magazine. SPACES Magazine. Retrieved 8 October 2020, from https://spacesmag.com/stories/history/san-francisco-skyline/.
Streitfeld, D. (2017). San Francisco’s Skyline, Now Inescapably Transformed by Tech. Nytimes.com. Retrieved 8 October 2020, from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/29/technology/salesforce-tower-san-francisco-skyline.html.
Tan, B. (2008). New housing in old Chinatown: barriers and incentives to affordable housing development (Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
Taylor, B. (2020). How ‘Urban Renewal’ Decimated the Fillmore District, and Took Jazz With It | KQED. KQED. Retrieved 8 October 2020, from https://www.kqed.org/news/11825401/how-urban-renewal-decimated-the-fillmore-district-and-took-jazz-with-it.
Yasukochi, C., Russell, L., & Levy, S. (2020). 2017-TECH30 Measuring Tech Industry Impacts Across North America Markets [Ebook] (pp. 7-24). CBRE. Retrieved 8 October 2020, from https://www.cbre.us/research-and-reports/Tech-30-2017.

